 It may now be said: "The way the formula is meant determines
which steps are to be taken". What is the criterion for the way the
formula is meant? It is, for example, the kind of way we always use it,
the way we are taught to use it.
We say, for instance, to someone who uses a sign unknown to us:
"If by ‘x!2’ you mean x2, then you get this value for y, if you mean
2X, that one."—Now ask yourself: how does one mean the one thing or
the other by"x!2"?
That will be how meaning it can determine the steps in advance.

 "It is as if we could grasp the whole use of the word in a
flash." Like what e.g.?—Can't the use—in a certain sense—be grasped
in a flash? And in what sense can it not?—The point is, that it is as if
we could 'grasp it in a flash' in yet another and much more direct sense
than that.—But have you a model for this? No. It is just that this
expression suggests itself to us. As the result of the crossing of
different pictures.

 You have no model of this superlative fact, but you are
seduced into using a super-expression. (It might be called a philosophical superlative.)

 The machine as symbolizing its action: the action of a
machine—I might say at first—seems to be there in it from the start.
What does that mean?—If we know the machine, everything else, that
is its movement, seems to be already completely determined.
We talk as if these parts could only move in this way, as if they
could not do anything else. How is this—do we forget the possibility
of their bending, breaking off, melting, and so on? Yes; in many cases
we don't think of that at all. We use a machine, or the drawing of a
machine, to symbolize a particular action of the machine. For instance,
we give someone such a drawing and assume that he will derive the
movement of the parts from it. (Just as we can give someone a number
by telling him that it is the twenty-fifth in the series i, 4, 9, 16, . . . .)
"The machine's action seems to be in it from the start" means:
we are inclined to compare the future movements of the machine
in their definiteness to objects which are already lying in a drawer
and which we then take out.——But we do not say this kind of thing
when we are concerned with predicting the actual behaviour of a
machine. Then we do not in general forget the possibility of a distortion of the parts and so on.——We do talk like that, however, when
we are wondering at the way we can use a machine to symbolize a
given way of moving—since it can also move in quite different ways.
We might say that a machine, or the picture of it, is the first of a
series of pictures which we have learnt to derive from this one.
But when we reflect that the machine could also have moved differently it may look as if the way it moves must be contained in the
machine-as-symbol far more determinately than in the actual machine.
As if it were not enough for the movements in question to be empirically determined in advance, but they had to be really—in a mysterious
sense—already present. And it is quite true: the movement of the
machine-as-symbol is predetermined in a different sense from that in
which the movement of any given actual machine is predetermined.

 When does one have the thought: the possible movements of
a machine are already there in it in some mysterious way?—Well,
when one is doing philosophy. And what leads us into thinking that?
The kind of way in which we talk about machines. We say, for example,
that a machine has (possesses) such-and-such possibilities of movement; we speak of the ideally rigid machine which can only move in
such-and-such a way.——What is this possibility of movement? It is
not the movement., but it does not seem to be the mere physical conditions
for moving either—as, that there is play between socket and pin,
the pin not fitting too tight in the socket. For while this is the empirical
condition for movement, one could also imagine it to be otherwise.
The possibility of a movement is, rather, supposed to be like a shadow
of the movement itself. But do you know of such a shadow? And
by a shadow I do not mean some picture of the movement—for such a
picture would not have to be a picture of just this movement. But the
possibility of this movement must be the possibility of just this
movement. (See how high the seas of language run here!)
The waves subside as soon as we ask ourselves: how do we use
the phrase "possibility of movement" when we are talking about a
given machine?——But then where did our queer ideas come from?
Well, I shew you the possibility of a movement, say by means of a
picture of the movement: 'so possibility is something which is like
reality'. We say: "It isn't moving yet, but it already has the possibility
of moving"——'so possibility is something very near reality'. Though
we may doubt whether such-and-such physical conditions make this
movement possible, we never discuss whether this is the possibility
of this or of that movement: 'so the possibility of the movement
stands in a unique relation to the movement itself; closer than that of a
picture to its subject'; for it can be doubted whether a picture is the
picture of this thing or that. We say "Experience will shew whether
this gives the pin this possibility of movement", but we do not say
"Experience will shew whether this is the possibility of this movement": 'so it is not an empirical fact that this possibility is the possibility
of precisely this movement'.
We mind about the kind of expressions we use concerning these
things; we do not understand them, however, but misinterpret them.
When we do philosophy we are like savages, primitive people, who
hear the expressions of civilized men, put a false interpretation on
them, and then draw the queerest conclusions from it.

 "But I don't mean that what I do now (in grasping a sense)
determines the future use causally and as a matter of experience, but
that in a queer way, the use itself is in some sense present."—But of
course it is, 'in some sense'! Really the only thing wrong with what you
say is the expression "in a queer way". The rest is all right; and the
sentence only seems queer when one imagines a different language-game
for it from the one in which we actually use it. (Someone once told
me that as a child he had been surprised that a tailor could 'sew a
dress'—he thought this meant that a dress was produced by sewing
alone, by sewing one thread on to another.)

 In our failure to understand the use of a word we take it as
the expression of a queer process. (As we think of time as a queer
medium, of the mind as a queer kind of being.)


 "It's as if we could grasp the whole use of a word in a flash."—
And that is just what we say we do. That is to say: we sometimes
describe what we do in these words. But there is nothing astonishing,
nothing queer, about what happens. It becomes queer when we are
led to think that the future development must in some way already be
present in the act of grasping the use and yet isn't present.—For wre say
that there isn't any doubt that we understand the word, and on the
other hand its meaning lies in its use. There is no doubt that I now
want to play chess, but chess is the game it is in virtue of all its rules
(and so on). Don't I know, then, which game I want to play until I
have played it? or are all the rules contained in my act of intending?
Is it experience that tells me that this sort of game is the usual consequence of such an act of intending? so is it impossible for me to be
certain what I am intending to do? And if that is nonsense—what
kind of super-strong connexion exists between the act of intending
and the thing intended?——Where is the connexion effected between
the sense of the expression "Let's play a game of chess" and all the
rules of the game?—Well, in the list of rules of the game, in the teaching
of it, in the day-to-day practice of playing.

 "But how can a rule shew me what I have to do at this point?
Whatever I do is, on some interpretation, in accord with the rule."—
That is not what we ought to say, but rather: any interpretation still
hangs in the air along with what it interprets, and cannot give it
any support. Interpretations by themselves do not determine meaning.
"Then can whatever I do be brought into accord with the rule?"—
Let me ask this: what has the expression of a rule—say a sign-post—
got to do with my actions? What sort of connexion is there here?—
Well, perhaps this one: I have been trained to react to this sign in a
particular way, and now I do so react to it.
But that is only to give a causal connexion; to tell how it has come
about that we now go by the sign-post; not what this going-by-thesign really consists in. On the contrary; I have further indicated that
a person goes by a sign-post only in so far as there exists a regular use
of sign-posts, a custom.

 Is what we call "obeying a rule" something that it would be
possible for only one man to do, and to do only once in his life?—
This is of course a note on the grammar of the expression "to obey a
rule".
It is not possible that there should have been only one occasion on
which someone obeyed a rule. It is not possible that there should have
been only one occasion on which a report was made, an order given or
understood; and so on.—To obey a rule, to make a report, to give an
order, to play a game of chess, are customs (uses, institutions).
To understand a sentence means to understand a language. To
understand a language means to be master of a technique.


 It is, of course, imaginable that two people belonging to a
tribe unacquainted with games should sit at a chess-board and go
through the moves of a game of chess; and even with all the appropriate
mental accompaniments. And if n>e were to see it we should say they
were playing chess. But now imagine a game of chess translated
according to certain rules into a series of actions which we do not
ordinarily associate with a game—say into yells and stamping of feet.
And now suppose those two people to yell and stamp instead of playing the form of chess that we are used to; and this in such a way
that their procedure is translatable by suitable rules into a game of
chess. Should we still be inclined to say they were playing a game?
What right would one have to say so?

 This was our paradox: no course of action could be determined by a rule, because every course of action can be made out to
accord with the rule. The answer was: if everything can be made out
to accord with the rule, then it can also be made out to conflict with it.
And so there would be neither accord nor conflict here.
It can be seen that there is a misunderstanding here from the mere fact
that in the course of our argument we give one interpretation after
another; as if each one contented us at least for a moment, until we
thought of yet another standing behind it. What this shews is that
there is a way of grasping a rule which is not an interpretation, but which
is exhibited in what we call "obeying the rule" and "going against it"
in actual cases.
Hence there is an inclination to say: every action according to the
rule is an interpretation. But we ought to restrict the term "interpretation" to the substitution of one expression of the rule for another.

 And hence also 'obeying a rule' is a practice. And to think one
is obeying a rule is not to obey a rule. Hence it is not possible to obey
a rule 'privately': otherwise thinking one was obeying a rule would be
the same thing as obeying it.


 Language is a labyrinth of paths. You approach from one
side and know your way about; you approach the same place from
another side and no longer know your way about.

 As things are I can, for example, invent a game that is never
played by anyone.—But would the following be possible too: mankind
has never played any games; once, however, someone invented a game
—which no one ever played?

 "But it is just the queer thing about intention, about the
mental process, that the existence of a custom, of a technique, is not
necessary to it. That, for example, it is imaginable that two people
should play chess in a world in which otherwise no games existed; and
even that they should begin a game of chess—and then be interrupted."
But isn't chess defined by its rules? And how are these rules present
in the mind of the person who is intending to play chess?

 Following a rule is analogous to obeying an order. We are
trained to do so; we react to an order in a particular way. But what if
one person reacts in one way and another in another to the order and
the training? Which one is right?
Suppose you came as an explorer into an unknown country with a
language quite strange to you. In what circumstances would you
say that the people there gave orders, understood them, obeyed them,
rebelled against them, and so on?
The common behaviour of mankind is the system of reference by
means of which we interpret an unknown language.

 Let us imagine that the people in that country carried on the
usual human activities and in the course of them employed, apparently,
an articulate language. If we watch their behaviour we find it intelligible, it seems 'logical'. But when we try to learn their language we
find it impossible to do so. For there is no regular connexion between
what they say, the sounds they make, and their actions; but still these
sounds are not superfluous, for if we gag one of the people, it has the
same consequences as with us; without the sounds their actions fall
into confusion—as I feel like putting it.
Are we to say that these people have a language: orders, reports,
and the rest?
There is not enough regularity for us to call it "language".

 Then am I defining "order" and "rule" by means of
"regularity"?—How do I explain the meaning of "regular", "uniform",
"same" to anyone?—I shall explain these words to someone who, say,
only speaks French by means of the corresponding French words.
But if a person has not yet got the concepts, I shall teach him to use the
words by means of examples and by practice.—And when I do this I
do not communicate less to him than I know myself.
In the course of this teaching I shall shew him the same colours,
the same lengths, the same shapes, I shall make him find them and
produce them, and so on. I shall, for instance, get him to continue an
ornamental pattern uniformly when told to do so.—And also to
continue progressions. And so, for example, when given: . . . ... to
go on: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
I do it, he does it after me; and I influence him by expressions of
agreement, rejection, expectation, encouragement. I let him go his
way, or hold him back; and so on.
Imagine witnessing such teaching. None of the words would be
explained by means of itself; there would be no logical circle.
The expressions "and so on", "and so on ad infinitum" are also
explained in this teaching. A gesture, among other things, might serve
this purpose. The gesture that means "go on like this", or "and so
on" has a function comparable to that of pointing to an object or a
place.
We should distinguish between the "and so on" which is, and the
"and so on" which is not, an abbreviated notation. "And so on ad inf."
is not such an abbreviation. The fact that we cannot write down all the
digits of TT is not a human shortcoming, as mathematicians sometimes
think.
Teaching which is not meant to apply to anything but the examples
given is different from that which 'points beyond' them.


 "But then doesn't our understanding reach beyond all the
examples?"—A very queer expression, and a quite natural one!—
But is that a//? Isn't there a deeper explanation; or mustn't at least
the understanding of the explanation be deeper?—Well, have I myself
a deeper understanding? Have I got more than I give in the explanation?—But then, whence the feeling that I have got more?
Is it like the case where I interpret what is not limited as a length
that reaches beyond every length?

 "But do you really explain to the other person what you
yourself understand? Don't you get him to guess the essential thing?
You give him examples,—but he has to guess their drift, to guess your
intention."—Every explanation which I can give myself I give to him
too.—"He guesses what I intend" would mean: various interpretations of my explanation come to his mind, and he lights on one of
them. So in this case he could ask; and I could and should answer him.

 How can he know how he is to continue a pattern by himself—
whatever instruction you give him?—Well, how do I know?——If
that means "Have I reasons?" the answer is: my reasons will soon
give out. And then I shall act, without reasons.

 When someone whom I am afraid of orders me to condnue
the series, I act quickly, with perfect certainty, and the lack of reasons
does not trouble me.

 "But this initial segment of a series obviously admitted of
various interpretations (e.g. by means of algebraic expressions) and
so you must first have chosen one such interpretation."—Not at all.
A doubt was possible in certain circumstances. But that is not to say
that I did doubt, or even could doubt. (There is something to be said,
which is connected with this, about the psychological 'atmosphere' of a
process.)
So it must have been intuition that removed this doubt?—If intuidon
is an inner voice—how do 1 know how I am to obey it? And how do I
know that it doesn't mislead me? For if it can guide me right, it can
also guide me wrong.
((Intuidon an unnecessary shuffle.))

 If you have to have an intuition in order to develop the series
1 2 3 4 . . . you must also have one in order to develop the series
2 2 2 2 ... .

215 . But isn't the same at least the same?
We seem to have an infallible paradigm of identity in the identity
of a thing with itself. I feel like saying: "Here at any rate there can't
be a variety of interpretations. If you are seeing a thing you are
seeing identity too."
Then are two things the same when they are what one thing is?
And how am I to apply what the one thing shews me to the case of
two things?

 "A thing is identical with itself."—There is no finer example
of a useless proposition, which yet is connected with a certain play
of the imagination. It is as if in imagination we put a thing into its
own shape and saw that it fitted.
We might also say: "Every thing fits into itself." Or again: "Every
thing fits into its own shape." At the same time we look at a thing
and imagine that there was a blank left for it, and that now it fits into
it exactly.
Does this spot
'//' into its white surrounding?—But that is just
how it would look if there had at first been a hole in its place and it then
fitted into the hole. But when we say "it fits" we are not simply
describing this appearance; not simply this situation,
"Every coloured patch fits exactly into its surrounding" is a rather
specialized form of the law of identity.


 "How am I able to obey a rule?"—if this is not a question
about causes, then it is about the justification for my following the
rule in the way I do.
If I have exhausted the justifications I have reached bedrock, and
my spade is turned. Then I am inclined to say: "This is simply what I
do."
(Remember that we sometimes demand definitions for the sake not
of their content, but of their form. Our requirement is an architectural one; the definition a kind of ornamental coping that supports
nothing.)

 Whence comes the idea that the beginning of a series is a
visible section of rails invisibly laid to infinity? Well, we might imagine
rails instead of a rule. And infinitely long rails correspond to the unlimited application of a rule.

 "All the steps are really already taken" means: I no longer
have any choice. The rule, once stamped with a particular meaning,
.traces the lines along which it is to be followed through the whole
of space.——But if something of this sort really were the case, how
would it help?
No; my description only made sense if it was to be understood
symbolically.—I should have said: This is how it strikes me.
When I obey a rule, I do not choose.
I obey the rule blindly.

 But what is the purpose of that symbolical proposition? It
was supposed to bring into prominence a difference between being
causally determined and being logically determined.

 My symbolical expression was really a mythological description of the use of a rule.


 "The line intimates to me the way I am to go." — But that is
of course only a picture. And if I judged that it intimated this or that as
it were irresponsibly, I should not say that I was obeying it like a rule.

 One does not feel that one has always got to wait upon the
nod (the whisper) of the rule. On the contrary, we are not on tenterhooks about what it will tell us next, but it always tells us the same,
and we do what it tells us.
One might say to the person one was training: "Look, I always do
the same thing: I . . . . . "

 The word "agreement" and the word "rule" are related to
one another, they are cousins. If I teach anyone the use of the one
word, he learns the use of the other with it.

 The use of the word "rule" and the use of the word "same" are
interwoven. (As are the use of "proposition" and the use of "true".)

 Suppose someone gets the series of numbers i, 3, 5, 7, . . . . by
working out the series 2.x -f- i1. And now he asks himself: "But am I
always doing the same thing, or something different every time?"
If from one day to the next you promise: "To-morrow I will come
and see you" — are you saying the same thing every day, or every day
something different?

 Would it make sense to say "If he did something different every
day we should not say he was obeying a rule"? That makes no sense.

 "We see a series in just one way!" — All right, but what is
that way? Clearly we see it algebraically, and as a segment of an
expansion. Or is there more in it than that? — "But the way we see it
surely gives us everything!" — But that is not an observation about the
segment of the series; or about anything that we notice in it; it gives
expression to the fact that we look to the rule for instruction and do
something, without appealing to anything else for guidance.

 I believe that I perceive something drawn very fine in a
segment of a series, a characteristic design, which only needs the
addition of "and so on", in order to reach to infinity.

 "The line intimates to me which way I am to go" is only a
paraphrase of: it is my last arbiter for the way I am to go.

 "But surely you can see . . . .?" That is just the characteristic
expression of someone who is under the compulsion of a rule.

 Let us imagine a rule intimating to me which way I am to
obey it; that is, as my eye travels along the line, a voice within me says:
"This way!"—What is the difference between this process of obeying
a kind of inspiration and that of obeying a rule? For they are surely
not the same. In the case of inspiration I await direction. I shall not
be able to teach anyone else my 'technique' of following the line.
Unless, indeed, I teach him some way of hearkening, some kind of
receptivity. But then, of course, I cannot require him to follow the line
in the same way as I do.
These are not my experiences of acting from inspiration and according to a rule; they are grammatical notes.

 It would also be possible to imagine such a training in a sort
of arithmetic. Children could calculate, each in his own way—as long
as they listened to their inner voice and obeyed it. Calculating in this
way would be like a sort of composing.

 Would it not be possible for us, however, to calculate as we
actually do (all agreeing, and so on), and still at every step to have a
feeling of being guided by the rules as by a spell, feeling astonishment
at the fact that we agreed? (We might give thanks to the Deity for our
agreement.)

 This merely shews what goes to make up what we call
"obeying a rule" in everyday life.

 Calculating prodigies who get the right answer but cannot
say how. Are we to say that they do not calculate? (A family of cases.)

 Imagine someone using a line as a rule in the following
way: he holds a pair of compasses, and carries one of its points along
the line that is the 'rule', while the other one draws the line that follows
the rule. And while he moves along the ruling line he alters the opening of the compasses, apparently with great precision, looking at the
rule the whole time as if it determined what he did. And watching him
we see no kind of regularity in this opening and shutting of the compasses. We cannot learn his way of following the line from it. Here
perhaps one really would say: "The original seems to intimate to him
which way he is to go. But it is not a rule."

 The rule can only seem to me to produce all its consequences
in advance if I draw them as a matter of course. As much as it is a matter
of course for me to call this colour "blue". (Criteria for the fact that
something is 'a matter of course' for me.)

 How is he to know what colour he is to pick out when he
hears "red"?—Quite simple: he is to take the colour whose image
occurs to him when he hears the word.—But how is he to know which
colour it is 'whose image occurs to him'? Is a further criterion needed
for that? (There is indeed such a procedure as choosing the colour
which occurs to one when one hears the word " . . . . " )
" 'Red' means the colour that occurs to me when I hear the word
<recl' "—would be a definition. Not an explanation of what it is to use
a word as a name.

 Disputes do not break out (among mathematicians, say) over
the question whether a rule has been obeyed or not. People don't
come to blows over it, for example. That is part of the framework
on which the working of our language is based (for example, in giving
descriptions).

 "So you are saying that human agreement decides what is
true and what is false?"—It is what human beings say that is true and
false; and they agree in the language they use. That is not agreement in
opinions but in form of life.

 If language is to be a means of communication there must
be agreement not only in definitions but also (queer as this may
sound) in judgments. This seems to abolish logic, but does not do so.—
It is one thing to describe methods of measurement, and another to
obtain and state results of measurement. But what we call "measuring"
is partly determined by a certain constancy in results of measurement.
